IBX-11083: Extending collaboration described in Developer Documentation (#3055)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/content_management/collaborative_editing/extend_collaborative_editing.md

---
description: Extend Collaborative editing
month_change: true
---

> # Extend Collaborative editing

Reviewer: In the main branch, there are currently 12 instances of "collaborative editing" (beginning with lowercase)and some 25 instances of "Collaborative editing" (with uppercase) within sentences (not in the beginning of line). I'd go through all the instances and change capitalization so that it is consistent.

Author: The scope of this PR is "Extend Collaborative editing", I'd fix it in another PR.

> Thanks to the ability to extend the [Collaborative editing](collaborative_editing_guide.md) feature, you can add even more functionalities that can improve workflows not only within content editing but also when working, for example, with the product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to the ability to extend the [Collaborative editing](collaborative_editing_guide.md) feature, you can introduce additional functionalities to enhance workflows — not only in the context of content editing but also when working with products.
```

> In the example below, you will learn how to extend this feature to enable a shared Cart functionality in the Commerce system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below demonstrates how to extend the feature to enable a shared Cart functionality in the Commerce system.
```

Author: I'd go with the previous version.

Reviewer: I suggested the change to remove the "you will learn" - we tend to avoid future tense and addressing the reader directly.

!!! tip

>     If you prefer learning from videos, you can check a presentation from Ibexa Summit 2025 that covers the Collaborative editing feature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you prefer learning from videos, watch the Ibexa Summit 2025 presentation that covers the Collaborative editing feature:
```

    [_Collaboration: greater than the sum of the parts_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dRB-SDlgX0I) by Marek Nocoń

## Create tables to hold Cart session data

First, you need to set up the database layer and define the collaboration context, in this example, Cart.

> Create the necessary tables to store the data and to link the collaboration session with the Cart you want to share.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, set up the database layer and define the collaboration context, in this example, Cart.
Create the necessary tables to store the data and to link the collaboration session with the Cart that you want to share.
```

Author: "that" not needed.

Reviewer: Not needed but improves readability.

> In the `data/schema.sql` file create a database table to store a reference to the session context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `data/schema.sql` file, create a database table to store a reference to the session context.
```

> In this example, it represents the shopping Cart (identified by the Cart identifier) and an additional numeric ID stored in the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the context is a shopping Cart, identified by `cart_identifier` and linked to the collaboration session through the Cart’s numeric ID stored in the database.
```

It was unclear what the "it" related to: the table, the reference or the session context.

=== "MySQL"

    ``` sql
        CREATE TABLE ibexa_collaboration_cart
        (
            id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
            cart_identifier VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
            CONSTRAINT ibexa_collaboration_cart_ibexa_collaboration_id_fk
                FOREIGN KEY (id) REFERENCES ibexa_collaboration (id)
                    ON DELETE CASCADE
        ) COLLATE = utf8mb4_general_ci;
    ```

=== "PostgreSQL"

    ``` sql
    CREATE TABLE ibexa_collaboration_cart (
    id INTEGER NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    cart_identifier VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    CONSTRAINT ibexa_collaboration_cart_ibexa_collaboration_id_fk
        FOREIGN KEY (id) REFERENCES ibexa_collaboration (id)
        ON DELETE CASCADE
    );
    ```

> ## Set up the persistance layer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Set up the persistence layer
```

> ## Set up the persistence layer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set up persistence layer
```

To extend Collaborative editing feature to support shared Cart collaboration, you need to prepare the persistence layer.

> This layer handles how the data about collaboration session and the Cart is stored, retrieved, and managed in the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you need to prepare the persistence layer, which is responsible for storing, retrieving, and managing collaboration session and Cart data in the database.
```

It ensures that when a user creates, joins, or updates a Cart session, the system can track session status, participants, and permissions.

> ### Implement the persistence gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Implement persistence gateway
```

The Gateway is the layer that connects the collaboration feature to the database.
It handles all the create, read, update, and delete operations for collaboration sessions, ensuring that session data is stored and retrieved correctly.

> It also uses a Discriminator to specify the session type, so it can interact with the correct tables and data structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also uses a Discriminator to specify the session type.
Based on the type, the Gateway interacts with the appropriate tables and data structures.
```

"Specify" or "identify"?

Author: I'd keep previous version.

Reviewer: Again, the change was to eliminate the ambiguity from "so it can interact". Does "it" refer to the Discriminator or the Gateway?

> This way, the system knows which Gateway to use to get or save the right data for each session type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way, the system uses the correct Gateway to get or save data for each session type.
```

> When creating the Database Gateways and mappers, you can use the build-in service tag: `ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.gateway`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When creating the Database Gateways and mappers, you can use the built-in service tag: `ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.gateway`:
```

```yaml
    tags:
    - { name: 'ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.gateway' }

> ```

Reviewer 3: It misses the `discriminator` parameter which will need explaination.

I would include a service.yaml file declaring the gateway from the example. It would be more clear about what should be declared as a service and tagged. See bellow.

> ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
When creating the Database Gateways and mappers, you can use the built-in service tags: 

- `ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.gateway` for the database gateway
   ```yaml
   tags:
     - { name: 'ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.gateway', discriminator: 'my_session_type' }
   ```
- `ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.mapper` for the mapper creating a session from persistence raw row
   ```yaml
   tags:
     - { name: 'ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.mapper', discriminator: 'my_session_type' }
   ```
- `ibexa.collaboration.service.session.domain.mapper` for the mapper creating a session from persistence object
   ```yaml
   tags:
     - { name: 'ibexa.collaboration.service.session.domain.mapper', type: App\…\MyPersistentSession }
   ```
- `ibexa.collaboration.service.session.persistence.mapper` for the mapper converting a session into a structure to create or update persistence
   ```yaml
   tags:
     - { name: 'ibexa.collaboration.service.session.persistence.mapper', type: 'my_session_type' }
   ```
````

> In the `Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Gateway` directory create the following files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Gateway` directory, create the following files:
```

> - `DatabaseSchema` - defines and creates the database tables needed to store shared Cart collaboration session data:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `DatabaseSchema` - defines the database tables needed to store shared Cart collaboration session data:
```
I'm not sure it can create it and the reader already created it from earlier provided SQL `CREATE TABLE` request.

> ``` php
> [[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Gateway/DatabaseSchema.php') =]]
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``` php
  [[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Gateway/DatabaseSchema.php') =]]
  ```
```

APPLIES TO MULTIPLE CODE SAMPLES BELOW

Since this is a bulleted list, each code sample is part of the bullet above. I would increase an indent before all code samples to make them subordinate to their bullets.

Author: The code doesn't work then.

Reviewer: I did not mean indents in the code, I meant moving the whole include one tab to the right. The code itself does not change, only the rendering in the docs. I think it worked for Marek quite recently.

> - `DatabaseGateway` - implements the gateway logic for getting and retrieving shared Cart collaboration data from the database, using a Discriminator to indicate the type of session (in this case, a Cart session):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DatabaseGateway` - implements the gateway logic for getting and retrieving shared Cart collaboration data from the database.
It uses a Discriminator to identify the type of session (in this case, a Cart session):
```

Author: I'd keep previous version.

Reviewer: Here, I suggest the change to eliminate the gerund. Please use your wording but remove the "using". also, the change helps split a long sentence into two short ones.

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Gateway/DatabaseGateway.php') =]]
```

### Define persistence Value objects

Value objects describe how collaboration session data is represented in the database.
Persistence gateway uses them to store, retrieve, and manipulate session information, such as the session ID, associated Cart, participants, and scopes.

> In the `Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values` directory create the following Value Objects:

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
Persistence gateway uses them to store, retrieve, and manipulate session information, such as the session ID, associated Cart, participants, and scopes.

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/config/services.yaml', ?, ?) =]]
```

In the `Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values` directory create the following Value Objects:
````

With a code_samples/collaboration/config/services.yaml looking like
```yaml
services:
#…
    App\Collaboration\Cart\Persistence\Gateway\DatabaseGateway:
        tags:
            - name: 'ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.gateway'
              discriminator: !php/const \App\Collaboration\Cart\Persistence\Gateway\DatabaseGateway::DISCRIMINATOR
```

> In the `Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values` directory create the following Value Objects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values` directory, create the following Value Objects:
```

- `CartSession` - represents the Cart collaboration session data:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values/CartSession.php') =]]
```

- `CartSessionCreateStruct` - defines the data needed to create a new Cart collaboration session:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values/CartSessionCreateStruct.php') =]]
```

- `CartSessionUpdateStruct` - defines the data used to update an existing Cart collaboration session:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values/CartSessionUpdateStruct.php') =]]
```

> ### Create the Cart session Struct objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create Cart session Struct objects
```

The next step involves the Public API — you need to integrate it with the database to store data and retrieve it from the tables created before.

> You need to create new files to define the data that is passed into the public API which are then used by the [SessionService](https://doc.ibexa.co/en/latest/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Collaboration-SessionServiceInterface.html) and public API handlers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You need to create new files to define the data that is passed into the public API which are then used by the [`SessionService`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Collaboration-SessionServiceInterface.html) and public API handlers.
```

> You need to create new files to define the data that is passed into the public API which are then used by the [SessionService](https://doc.ibexa.co/en/latest/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Collaboration-SessionServiceInterface.html) and public API handlers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step is to integrate the Public API with the database so that it can store and retrieve data from the tables created earlier.
You need to create new files to define the data that is passed into the public API.
This data is then used by the [SessionService](https://doc.ibexa.co/en/latest/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Collaboration-SessionServiceInterface.html) and public API handlers.
```

Are the files used by the SessionService, or the data? If "the files", start the third sentence accordingly.

> In the `Collaboration/Cart` directory create the following Session Structs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `Collaboration/Cart` directory, create the following Session Structs:
```

- `CartSessionCreateStruct` - holds all necessary properties (like session token, participants, scopes, and the Cart reference) needed by the `SessionService` to create the shared Cart session:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartSessionCreateStruct.php') =]]
```

- `CartSessionUpdateStruct` - defines the properties used to update an existing Cart collaboration session, including participants, scopes, and metadata:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartSessionUpdateStruct.php') =]]
```

- `CartSession` - represents a Cart collaboration session, storing its ID, token, associated Cart, participants, and scope:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartSession.php') =]]
```

> - `CartSessionType` - defines the type of the collaboration session (in this case indicating it’s a Cart session):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `CartSessionType` - defines the type of the collaboration session (in this case it indicates it’s a Cart session):
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartSessionType.php') =]]
```

## Create mappers

> Mappers are used to return session data into the format the database needs and to send it to the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mappers revert session data into the format the database needs, and send it to the repository.
```

return -> revert, convert, transform?

> In the `src\Collaboration\Cart\Mapper` folder create four mappers:

Reviewer 2: Invalid path separator - we should use `/` instead of `\`
```suggestion
In the `src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper` folder create four mappers:
```

> In the `src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper` folder create four mappers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper` folder, create four mappers:
```

> - `CartProxyMapper` - creates a simplified version of the Cart with only the necessary data to reduce memory usage in collaboration sessions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `CartProxyMapper` - creates a simplified version of the Cart with only the necessary data to reduce memory usage in collaboration sessions:
```

For consistency with other occurrences.

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper/CartProxyMapper.php') =]]
```

> - `CartProxyMapperInterface` - defines how a Cart should be converted into a simplified object used in collaboration session and specifies what methods the mapper must implement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `CartProxyMapperInterface` - defines how a Cart should be converted into a simplified object that is used in collaboration session and specifies what methods the mapper must implement:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper/CartProxyMapperInterface.php') =]]
```

> 

Reviewer 3: See #3078 for this missing mapper

````suggestion

- `Persistence/Mapper` - builds the session object from persistence row:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Mapper.php') =]]
```

````

> - `CartSessionDomainMapper` - builds the session object that the app works with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `CartSessionDomainMapper` - builds the session object that the app works with:
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `CartSessionDomainMapper` - builds the session object from persistence object:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper/CartSessionDomainMapper.php') =]]
```

> - `CartSessionPersistenceMapper` - prepares session data to be saved or updated in the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `CartSessionPersistenceMapper` - prepares session data to be saved or updated in the database:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper/CartSessionPersistenceMapper.php') =]]
```

> 

Reviewer 3: See #3078 for this missing file
````suggestion

In `services.yaml`, declare and tags the gateway and the mappers:

``` yaml
services:
    # …
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/config/services.yaml', 21, 42) =]]
```

````

> ## Allow participants to access the Cart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Allow participants to access Cart
```

To start collaborating, you need to work on permissions.
This involves decorating the `PermissionResolver` and `CartResolver`.

> This step makes sure that if a Cart is part of a Cart collaboration session, users can access it due to the given permission, and in all other cases, it falls back to the default implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable collaboration, you must configure the appropriate permissions.
This involves decorating the `PermissionResolver` and `CartResolver`.

This ensures that when a Cart is part of a Cart collaboration session, users can access it based on the defined permissions.
In all other cases, the system falls back to the default implementation.
```

!!! caution "Decorating permissions"

>     Be careful when decorating permissions to change the behavior only as necessary, ensuring the Cart is shared only with the intended users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When decorating permissions, be careful to change the behavior only as necessary, to ensure that the Cart is shared only with the intended users.
```

In the `src/Collaboration/Cart` directory, create the following files:

> - `PermissionResolverDecorator` – customizes the permission resolver to handle access rules for Cart collaboration sessions, allowing participants to view or edit shared Carts while preserving default permission checks for all other cases. Here you can decide what scope is available for this collaboration session by choosing between `view` or `edit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `PermissionResolverDecorator` – customizes the permission resolver to handle access rules for Cart collaboration sessions.
It allows participants to view or edit shared Carts while preserving default permission checks for all other cases.
Here you can decide what scope is available for this collaboration session by choosing between `view` or `edit`:
```

Author: In the list I'd avoid additional spacing.

Reviewer: I am sorry, my intention was to split the sentence, not introduce line breaks. I think that I added tabs before the second and tird sentence it would work (and look clean in markdown). The same applies to subsequent instances of a similar comment.

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/PermissionResolverDecorator.php') =]]
```

> - `CartResolverDecorator` – resolves the shared Carts in collaboration sessions, it checks if a Cart belongs to a collaboration session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `CartResolverDecorator` – resolves the shared Carts in collaboration sessions by checking if a Cart belongs to a collaboration session:
```

> - `CartResolverDecorator` – extends the permission resolver to allow access to shared Carts in collaboration sessions, it checks if a Cart belongs to a collaboration session.

Reviewer 2: `CartResolverDecorator` does not extend the permissions resolver. It resolves the shared cart.

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartResolverDecorator.php') =]]
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion

In `services.yaml`, declare those decorators services associated to what they decorate:

``` yaml
services:
    # …
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/config/services.yaml', 43) =]]
```

````

> ## Build dedicated controllers to manage the Cart sharing flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Build dedicated controllers to manage Cart sharing flow
```

> To support Cart sharing, you need to create controllers which handle the collaboration flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support Cart sharing, create controllers which handle the collaboration flow.
```

They are responsible for starting a sharing session, adding participants, and allowing users to join an existing shared Cart.

You need to create two controllers:

- `ShareCartCreateController` - to create the Cart collaboration session and add participants

> - `ShareCartJoinController` that enables joining the session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ShareCartCreateController` - creates the Cart collaboration session and adds participants
- `ShareCartJoinController` - enables joining the session
```

### `ShareCartCreateController`

> When you enter the user email address and submit it, the request is handled by this controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This controller handles the request when you enter an email address of the user that you want to invite and submit it.
```

I thought it makes sense to specify why you're entering the address. It is explained later but here is the first place yu mention entering the address

It captures the email address and checks whether the form has been submitted.
If yes, the form data is retrieved, and the `cartResolver` verifies whether there is currently a shared Cart.

If a shared Cart exists, the Cart is retrieved and a session is created (`$cart` becomes the session context).

> In the next step, `addParticipant`, the user whose email address was provided is added to the session and assigned a scope (either `view` or `edit`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `addParticipant` step, the user whose email address was provided is added to the session and assigned a scope (either `view` or `edit`).
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Controller/ShareCartCreateController.php') =]]
```

### `ShareCartJoinController`

It enables joining a Cart session.

> The session token created earlier is passed in the URL, and in the `Join` action the system attempts to retrieve the session associated with that token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The session token created earlier is passed in the URL.
In the `join` action, the system attempts to retrieve the session associated with that token.
```

> If the token is invalid, an exception is thrown indicating that the session cannot be accessed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the token is invalid, an exception is thrown to indicate that the session cannot be accessed.
```

> If the session exists, the session parameter (`collaboration_session`) is retrieved and store the token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the session exists, the session parameter (`collaboration_session`) is retrieved and the session stores the token.
```

Finally, `redirectToRoute` redirects the user to the Cart view and passes the identifier of the shared Cart.

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Controller/ShareCartJoinController.php') =]]
```

!!! caution "Session parameter"

>     Avoid using a generic session parameter name such as `current_collaboration_session` (it's used here only for example purposes).

Reviewer 2: Mixing parameter name related to store collaboration session. Once is `collaboration_session` and second time is `current_collaboration_session`. Should be `collaboration_session` see: https://github.com/ibexa/documentation-developer/pull/3055/changes#diff-689f7bfa546218c7e342d187e800ac2e629f8f28c37a9bb082e6c0104d1d799eR23
```suggestion
    Avoid using a generic session parameter name such as `collaboration_session` (it's used here only for example purposes).
```

>     The user can participate in multiple sessions simultaneously (of one or many types), so using this parameter would cause it to be constantly overwritten.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The user can participate in multiple sessions simultaneously (of one or many types), so using such name would cause the parameter to be constantly overwritten.
```

>     Therefore, active sessions should not be resolved based on such parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: I'd keep it - it clarifies the recommendation.

## Integrate with Symfony forms by adding forms and templates

To support inviting users to a shared Cart, you need to create a dedicated form and a data class.
The form collects the email address of the user that you want to invite, and the data class is used to safely pass that information from the form to the controller.

> - `ShareCartType` - a simple form for entering the email address of the user you want to invite to share the Cart. The form contains a single input field where you enter the email address manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ShareCartType` - a simple form for entering an email address of the user that you want to invite to share the Cart.
The form contains a single input field where you enter the email address manually:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Form/Type/ShareCartType.php') =]]
```

> - `ShareCartData` - this class holds the email address submitted through the form and pass it to the controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ShareCartData` - a class that holds the email address submitted through the form and passes it to the controller:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Form/Data/ShareCartData.php') =]]
```

The last step is to integrate the new session type into your application by adding templates.
In this step, the view is rendered.

> You need to add following templates in the `templates/themes/standard/cart` folder:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to add the following Twig templates in the `templates/themes/standard/cart` folder:
```

Reviewer 3: Change to `storefront` theme to work properly (see #3078):
```suggestion
You need to add the following Twig templates in the `templates/themes/storefront/cart` folder:
```

> - `share` - this Twig template defines the view for the Cart sharing form. It renders the form where a user can enter an email address to invite someone to collaborate on the Cart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `share` - defines the view for the Cart sharing form.
It renders the form where you enter an email address to invite someone to collaborate on the Cart:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/templates/themes/standard/cart/share.html.twig') =]]
```

> - `share_result` - this Twig template renders the result page after a Cart has been shared. If the shared Cart exists in the system, the created session object is passed to the view and displayed. A message like "Cart has been shared…" is displayed, along with a link to access the session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `share_result` - renders the result page after a Cart has been shared.
If the shared Cart exists in the system, the created session object is passed to the view and displayed.
A message like "Cart has been shared…" is displayed, along with a link to access the session:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/templates/themes/standard/cart/share_result.html.twig') =]]
```

> - `view` - is the template that shows the Cart page. It displays the Cart content and includes the “Share Cart” button and other elements for Cart collaboration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `view` - shows the Cart page.
It displays the Cart content and includes the “Share Cart” button and other elements for Cart collaboration:
```

Reviewer 3: There is nothing else than the button:

```suggestion
- `view` - shows the Cart page.
It displays the Cart content and includes the “Share cart” button:
```

=== "MySQL"

    ``` sql
    [[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/ibexa_collaboration_cart.mysql.sql', 0, None, '    ') =]]
    ```

=== "PostgreSQL"

    ``` sql
    [[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/ibexa_collaboration_cart.postgresql.sql', 0, None, '    ') =]]
    ```

## Set up persistence layer

Now you need to prepare the persistence layer, which is responsible for storing, retrieving, and managing collaboration session and Cart data in the database.

It ensures that when a user creates, joins, or updates a Cart session, the system can track session status, participants, and permissions.

### Implement persistence gateway

The Gateway is the layer that connects the collaboration feature to the database.
It handles all the create, read, update, and delete operations for collaboration sessions, ensuring that session data is stored and retrieved correctly.

It also uses a Discriminator to specify the session type, so it can interact with the correct tables and data structures.
This way, the system uses the correct Gateway to get or save data for each session type.

> When creating the Database Gateways and mappers, you can use the built-in service tag: `ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.gateway`:

Reviewer 3: (looks like a merge result issue)
```suggestion
When creating the Database Gateways and mappers, you can use the built-in service tags:
```

- `ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.gateway` - for the database gateway:

   ```yaml
   tags:
     - { name: 'ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.gateway', discriminator: 'my_session_type' }
   ```

- `ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.mapper` - for the mapper that creates a session from a persistence raw row:

   ```yaml
   tags:
     - { name: 'ibexa.collaboration.persistence.session.mapper', discriminator: 'my_session_type' }
   ```

- `ibexa.collaboration.service.session.domain.mapper` - for the mapper that creates a session from a persistence object:

   ```yaml
   tags:
     - { name: 'ibexa.collaboration.service.session.domain.mapper', type: App\…\MyPersistentSession }
   ```

- `ibexa.collaboration.service.session.persistence.mapper` - for the mapper that converts a session into a structure used to create or update persistence:

   ```yaml
   tags:
     - { name: 'ibexa.collaboration.service.session.persistence.mapper', type: 'my_session_type' }
   ```

> In the `Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Gateway` directory, create the following files:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the `src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Gateway/` directory, create the following files:
```

- `DatabaseSchema` - defines the database tables needed to store shared Cart collaboration session data:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Gateway/DatabaseSchema.php') =]]
```

- `DatabaseGateway` - implements the gateway logic for getting and retrieving shared Cart collaboration data from the database, using a Discriminator to indicate the type of session (in this case, a Cart session):

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Gateway/DatabaseGateway.php') =]]
```

### Define persistence Value objects

Value objects describe how collaboration session data is represented in the database.
Persistence gateway uses them to store, retrieve, and manipulate session information, such as the session ID, associated Cart, participants, and scopes.

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/config/services.yaml', 33, 38) =]]
```

> In the `Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values` directory, create the following Value Objects:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the `src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values/` directory, create the following Value Objects:
```

- `CartSession` - represents the Cart collaboration session data:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values/CartSession.php') =]]
```

- `CartSessionCreateStruct` - defines the data needed to create a new Cart collaboration session:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values/CartSessionCreateStruct.php') =]]
```

- `CartSessionUpdateStruct` - defines the data used to update an existing Cart collaboration session:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Values/CartSessionUpdateStruct.php') =]]
```

### Create Cart session Struct objects

The next step is to integrate the Public API with the database so that it can store and retrieve data from the tables created earlier.
You need to create new files to define the data that is passed into the public API.
This data is then used by the [`SessionService`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Collaboration-SessionServiceInterface.html) and public API handlers.

> In the `Collaboration/Cart` directory, create the following Session Structs:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the `src/Collaboration/Cart/` directory, create the following Session Structs:
```

- `CartSessionCreateStruct` - holds all necessary properties (like session token, participants, scopes, and the Cart reference) needed by the `SessionService` to create the shared Cart session:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartSessionCreateStruct.php') =]]
```

- `CartSessionUpdateStruct` - defines the properties used to update an existing Cart collaboration session, including participants, scopes, and metadata:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartSessionUpdateStruct.php') =]]
```

- `CartSession` - represents a Cart collaboration session, storing its ID, token, associated Cart, participants, and scope:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartSession.php') =]]
```

- `CartSessionType` - defines the type of the collaboration session (in this case it indicates it’s a Cart session):

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartSessionType.php') =]]
```

## Create mappers

Mappers convert session data into the format required by the database and pass it to the repository.

> In the `src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper` folder, create following mappers:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the `src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper/` directory, create following mappers:
```

- `CartProxyMapper` - creates a simplified version of the Cart with only the necessary data to reduce memory usage in collaboration sessions:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper/CartProxyMapper.php') =]]
```

- `CartProxyMapperInterface` - defines how a Cart should be converted into a simplified object that is used in collaboration session and specifies what methods the mapper must implement:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper/CartProxyMapperInterface.php') =]]
```

- `CartSessionDomainMapper` - builds the session object from persistence object:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper/CartSessionDomainMapper.php') =]]
```

- `CartSessionPersistenceMapper` - prepares session data to be saved or updated in the database:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Mapper/CartSessionPersistenceMapper.php') =]]
```

> - `Persistence/Mapper` - builds the session object from persistence row:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And in `src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/`, create this last mapper:

- `Persistence/Mapper` - builds the session object from persistence row:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/Persistence/Mapper.php') =]]
```

In `services.yaml`, declare and tags the gateway and the mappers:

``` yaml
services:
    # …
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/config/services.yaml', 21, 42) =]]
```

## Allow participants to access Cart

To enable collaboration, you must configure the appropriate permissions.
This involves decorating the `PermissionResolver` and `CartResolver`.

This ensures that when a Cart is part of a Cart collaboration session, users can access it based on the defined permissions.
In all other cases, the system falls back to the default implementation.

!!! caution "Decorating permissions"

    When decorating permissions, be careful to change the behavior only as necessary, to ensure that the Cart is shared only with the intended users.

> In the `src/Collaboration/Cart` directory, create the following files:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the `src/Collaboration/Cart/` directory, create the following files:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/PermissionResolverDecorator.php') =]]
```

- `CartResolverDecorator` – resolves the shared Carts in collaboration sessions by checking if a Cart belongs to a collaboration session:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Collaboration/Cart/CartResolverDecorator.php') =]]
```

In `services.yaml`, declare those decorator services associated with what they decorate:

``` yaml
services:
    # …
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/config/services.yaml', 43) =]]
```

## Build dedicated controllers to manage Cart sharing flow

To support Cart sharing, create controllers which handle the collaboration flow.
They are responsible for starting a sharing session, adding participants, and allowing users to join an existing shared Cart.

You need to create two controllers:

- `ShareCartCreateController` - creates the Cart collaboration session and adds participants

> - `ShareCartJoinController` - enables joining the session.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `ShareCartJoinController` - allows to join the session
```

    Therefore, active sessions should not be resolved based on such parameter.

## Integrate with Symfony forms by adding forms and templates

To support inviting users to a shared Cart, you need to create a dedicated form and a data class.
The form collects the email address of the user that you want to invite, and the data class is used to safely pass that information from the form to the controller.

- `ShareCartType` - a simple form for entering an email address of the user you want to invite to share the Cart. The form contains a single input field where you enter the email address manually:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Form/Type/ShareCartType.php') =]]
```

- `ShareCartData` - a class that holds the email address submitted through the form and passes it to the controller:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/collaboration/src/Form/Data/ShareCartData.php') =]]
```

The last step is to integrate the new session type into your application by adding templates.
In this step, the view is rendered.

> You need to add the following Twig templates in the `templates/themes/storefront/cart` folder:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You need to add the following Twig templates in the `templates/themes/storefront/cart/` directory:
```
